### Arthur Kim
### Professor Brewer
### 21 Nov 2021
## Gender Disaggregated CDR's and Climate Change: Data Science Methods

Because climate change is a dire issue affecting all of humanity, much research has gone into understanding how it affects populations and human development, as well as forecasting climate-related disasters so that we can act accordingly. In order to determine and deal with people’s numerous vulnerabilities to climate disasters, we have developed sophisticated means of forecasting and using geospatial population data in order to allow for appropriate warnings and action.  For one, we use call detail records (CDR’s) in order to generate a spatially-accurate map of population dynamics.  Additionally, in order to accurately forecast disasters such as floods and droughts, we have combined AI with Earth System Model (ESM) data, as well as used satellites (GRACE) to directly measure changes in mass distributions.   Despite our understanding and technical prowess, we have not perfected our ability to evaluate vulnerability and make policies accordingly. For one, due to the high amount of complexity in climate science, it is near-impossible to perfectly determine the effects of climate change (7). Additionally, only recently have we begun to understand the importance of considering the role of sex and gender in climate change vulnerability (8).  Luckily however, a recent study has shown that gender-disaggregated CDR’s are a feasible data-gathering method.  Therefore, they can be used to evaluate the gender distributions within the most vulnerable groups, giving us a better idea of the needs that will need to be fulfilled. By ensuring that people receive the specific aid that they need, we can help reduce inequality in terms of vulnerability co climate change, promoting greater gender equality in our society.

CDR's have proven to be an effective means of evaluating population dynamics. When a cell-phone user makes a phone call, they are localized to a Base Transciever Station (BTS). CDR's include information on the BTS location of a caller, the time and duration of the call, and of importance for this study, the gender of the caller. When callers are localized to different BTS's over time, we have a highly accurate picture of their dynamics because of the relatively small areas of the antenna coverage areas. Because of the spatial and temporal elements of CDR's, when the CDR's of many callers are aggregated, they provide an accurate map of population dynamics and offer insight about human activities. Rahul Goel et al. in their *Plos One* article, "Understanding gender segregation through Call Data Records: An Estonian case study" disaggregated the CDR's by gender in order to measure the dynamics of men and women separately. This can be applied in the study of climate change vulnerability in order to reduce disproportionality by gender. By knowing who is located in areas forecasted to be hit hard by climate disasters, appropriate warnings can be issued in order to bolster adaptive capacities and minimize harm. Ultimately, CDR's are considered secondary data because the data are generated by the cell companies only to be used later by researchers.  

Like in most disciplines in the modern world, ML and AI have found their way into climate science and disaster forecasting. The ML finds correlations in big ESM data, which allow for forecasts of disasters to be made. Using this information, AI can issue timely automated warnings, improving societal adaptive capacities. The ESM data iself is the aggregation of meterological data, specifically the relationships between climate and geological cycles, which can be used to generate predictive outputs of the climate. The outputs of numerous different ESM's have been aggregated into a single database called Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5), which has been invaluable for modeling the complex climate. Unfortunately however, CMIP5 has had issues due to discrepancies between the different ESM's. ML and AI thanks to their analytical prowess have helped mend this issue.

Recent notable sources of ESM data have been the GRACE and GRACE Follow-on (GRACE-Fo) satellite programs. The original GRACE program lasted from 2002 to 2017; thanks to its success, the second GRACE-Fo satellites were launched which are currently in operation. The objective of GRACE is to directly measure changes in the hydrological mass distribution. In order to do so, GRACE consists of two satellites orbiting in tandem with a constant distance between them. Large variations in the terrestrial mass distribution caused by large water sources like glaciers, terrestrial bodies of water, and large reservoirs cause slight perturbations in the Earth's gravity field. When the GRACE satellites travel through the warped gravitational field, the distance between them changes slightly. The distance can be precisely determined and by using a bunch of physics calculations, the mass distribution can be quantified. Changes in the hydrological mass distribution can be determined when the GRACE satellites fly over the same area multiple times and experience different perturbations in the distance between them. These changes in the mass distribution directly influence the climate, and can therefore be used to forecast disasters well in advance.  

In order for CDR's to be useful for mapping the movement of people, it is necessary that each point on the surface of the Earth be associated with a specific antenna. Csáji et al. in their *Elsevier* article, "Exploring the Mobility of Mobile Phone Users" accomplished this using a Voronoi Tesselation, which divides space into specific areas based on the closest antenna to each point in space. The adjacent areas around the most frequently used antennae were grouped together using Delaunay Neighborship in order to designate "locations" of interest. In order to work out overall calling patterns, k-means clustering was used with k=3, which revealed a clear spatio-temporal pattern of call dynamics. This pattern nicely followed the independent statistics from the Portuguese National Institute of Statistics, validating the model.
